Alright, so I've mentioned list comprehensions a couple of times now. The time's now come to see what they are.
Now Python has comprehensions for lists, sets and dicts - dictionaries in other words.
And it also has generator expressions which are very similar to write.
Now we're going to start with list comprehensions and then show how set and dict comprehensions work in the
same way.
So we're going to create a new python file.
Now I'm going to call mine listfor.
Alright, so let's review some basics of iterating over a list. So if we start with print parenthesis under
score underscore file underscore underscore, then skip to line three, numbers equals square
brackets one comma, space, two comma space, three comma space, four, five and six, enclosing right square bracket.
Then line five, squares equals left and right square brackets. Next line, for number in numbers colon.
Then next line, squares dot append.
That's going to be parenthesis number space
star star space two and on line nine,
we're going to close that off with a print parentheses squares.
Now don't worry about that first line just yet.
It just prints out the full name of the python file we're executing,
and you're going to see why we want to do that in a moment. And it should be fairly obvious
to you now what the rest of the code will do,
even without running it.
So it's creating a new list called squares, containing the squares of the values in numbers.
Now we can convert that to a list comprehension very easily.
But let's just check that this does work first.
You can see we've got the output there, and what I might do is just move the run window
output down to the bottom, so you can see things a little bit clearer, and move this down a little bit. I'll close that
for now.
Alright so I mentioned that we can convert that quite easily to a list comprehension.
But before we write that code, it will be useful to compare the comprehensions with the corresponding
for loops.
Now IntelliJ IDEA allows two files to be displayed side by side and that's going to be a good way
to compare the two different methods.
Alright, so to see those two files
we can Right-Click up here in listfor, and we can choose split vertically.
Now that's showing the same file at the moment in two different panes, but I can open another file in one
of the panes.
So first though, we need to create a new python file.
I'm going to call that listcomp.
We want to make sure that we've selected this left pane over here first, so that listcomp opens to the left of list
for, which we've got on the right.
So let's go ahead and do that. Create a new file,
and again it's listcomp. Now what I'll do is I'll just close the project pane for now just to give us a bit more space here.
Alright, so we've got these two files next to each other.
Now the code to the right but using a comprehension, looks something like this.
So I'm going to start with print parentheses underscore underscore file underscore underscore again, closing parentheses, then
line three, numbers equals square brackets 1 comma space 2 3 4 5 6,
line five, squares, this is where it gets a little bit different, squares equals left square bracket number star star
two, space two, for number in numbers.
Then on line seven we're going to still print squares.
Now that does almost exactly the same thing
and I think you'd agree it's a lot more concise.
Basically, one line of code instead of three - I'm talking about this line here, on line five, compared
to what we're doing on lines 5 3 7 in listfor.py.
And again, we'll just run the right hand side first, listfor - there's the output for listfor -
and come over here to this side and run that for listcomp, and you can see we've got the same output for both.
And you can probably see now why I've actually chosen to output the first,
or to have the first line of the output showing with the complete path, because you can now see for sure which program
is executed. We've got listcomp.py here on the left hand side and if I run this again by right clicking
the right hand side, you can see we're running listfor.py
It just makes it a bit easier when you've got two windows open.
Well, just in general, having two sets of code doing pretty much the same thing,
so you're sure you're running one version compared to another.
It is actually very easy to run the wrong program in that scenario,
so this really just lets us check that we're running the program we expect we're running.
Now I know technically, IntelliJ displays it anyway, right up here at the top of the output, at the
top of the window.
But not everyone taking this course is using the IntelliJ IDEAs which is why I've done that.
Right
so let's have a look at that list comprehension, in listcomp.py over here.
Now the comprehension's the part after the equals, and we can tell it's a list comprehension because of the
square, the square brackets.
So it's basically this part here. And just to confirm that, if I change these square brackets
to curly braces instead,
and if I run that again,
you can see down the bottom in the output
now, we get a set instead.
So it's now a set comprehension.
So everything I say about list comprehensions will also apply to set comprehensions.
They're the same except one produces a list and the other produces a set.
Right, so lets undo that change and go back to our list comprehension,
making sure that it still works.
Alright, so as you can see on screen, this list comprehension's in two parts.
So the first part is the expression that we want to return -
number to the power two in this case.
Now the second part, the second part's an iteration over a sequence.
So it's identical to the for part of our for loop in listfor - the for numbers in numbers colon - except
we don't need the colon at the end.
Now there's more to comprehensions and we'll extend that definition shortly.
Alright so back to the code. A list comprehension produces a list. Now it does that by evaluating the
expression for each item in the iterable.
Now in this case it evaluates the expression number, star star two, or number to the power of two, for each
number in the numbers sequence.
Now we can use anything that can be iterated over - a string for example, or a generator such as a range
for argument's sake.
So if we change this over here to instead of putting in numbers - well actually what I'll do is I'll comment this
first line out to make it a bit easier.
We change squares now to be squares equals, left and right square brackets,
number star star two again, then for number in range, parentheses one comma space seven.
And we've got the closing right square bracket there.
Now if we run that,
you can see we've got the same output as we had previously.
Now at this point if you're thinking, so what, we can do the same with a for loop,
bear with me and stick with me here. Now we're going to be looking at why comprehensions are such a really
cool feature in a few minutes.
But first let's see some more examples before we look at the list comprehension in more detail.
Now I want to come back to this code, so I'm going to create another file for this code. Now rather than
expanding the project pane,
if you've got that closed you can actually, you can create a new python file by just coming up to the file
menu, selecting New and selecting Python File - doing it that way.
And the file we want here
we're going to call it examples.
Alright,
so lets start with, on line one, text equals and double quotes
What have the Romans ever done for us.
Line three, capitals
equals left and right square brackets, char dot upper parentheses for char in text, then on line 5 we're going to
print parentheses capitals.
So if we run this program,
you can see down the bottom there,
we get a list of all the letters in the text,
each one converted to uppercase.
Now here the list we're getting is made up of the uppercase version of each character in the text.
So as long as you can produce something that can be iterated over, you can use it to provide the
input to a comprehension.
For example, we can split that text up into individual words if we wanted to do that.
Now we've actually used the split function before, and it actually returns a list.
Now a list can be iterated over,
so therefore we can produce a list of all the words in the text.
So let's go ahead and do that and we'll add that below the existing code starting on line seven; words equals
left and right square brackets, word dot upper, and left and right parentheses, for word in text
dot split, then another parentheses, two single quotes and a space between those two single quotes.
And obviously, we've got our closing right square bracket there.
Then the next line, it's just print words, and if we do that we should find that we've got all the words
capitalized when we run the program, and you can see 'what have the Romans ever done for us'
now in uppercase - capitalized in other words.
Now if we didn't want to process the words in some way, such as converting them to uppercase, then there's
no need to use a list comprehension.
So this code I'm about to type in, we can just print out or produce a list of the words purely
by splitting the string. So I can start with lc underscore words is equal to text dot split parentheses,
then we've got our two single quotes again with the space between them, and we can just print lc words.
So we can run that
and obviously, we get the same result there.
But in this case we're just outputting them without actually processing the words in any way.
So comprehensions are great, as we're about to see, but don't throw them in
just because you can. Make sure they really are solving a problem. In that last example there's no need
to use a comprehension unless you really wanted to convert the words to uppercase.
Using one just to produce a list of words will work, but it just adds more complexity to your application.
So what I mean is don't do something like this;
so something along the lines of lc underscore words equals left and right square brackets word for word
in text dot split parentheses single quote and a space between it, and print parentheses
lc underscore words.
Now
we can run that, and obviously, we get the same result but it's more complex unecessarily, than the code
which works identically on line ten - this is the code on line thirteen
I'm talking about, and it's also inefficient.
The code on line 13 iterates over the list that split returns, then appends each item to the new list.
OK so time to start looking at why a comprehension can be preferable to a for loop,
apart from just saving a couple of lines of code.
So way back in Section 11, we created a function to centre text on an 80 column display.
Let's go ahead and create a new file
here, File, New, Python File and we're going to call this one centre_text.py
OK what I'm going to do then before I start going through with the code is just close down this file over here. We don't need it anymore.
So you'll get back to a full screen again, and if you remember way back in Section 11, we created
a function to centre text on an 80 column display.
So I'm going to paste in the code from that section and just to save you a bit of time,
I've also got that code in the resources section of this video.
Right, so we're going to paste it in there now,
centre_text.py
That's the code there,
and if we run the program,
we can see that it seems to work pretty well there as you can see in the example. We're concatenating strings
inside a for loop up here, on line, the for
loop's on line 3, basically lines 3 and 4.
And that's not a good idea if it can be avoided, and also has an effect that we don't want. Now to see
what that effect is,
I'm going to use a minus character instead of a space on line four. Here I'm going to change that to a minus
instead of a space.
Now if we actually run this program again we should be able to see the undesirable result, or the undesirable
effect.
You can see that there. The minus has added to the end of the strings, not just between the items in the list.
Now that didn't really matter when we were just displaying the result because you couldn't see the spaces,
but it could be important in other applications, though.
Now to give a rather contrived example,
if you were searching for strings ending in spam, you wouldn't find any. The strings ended in spam space, which
means that they wouldn't be found in a search for spam without a trailing space.
Now fortunately, though, that's easily fixed.
We can use join rather than a for loop.
So let's go ahead and modify the function, and I'm also going to comment out a couple of lines in the
main block and you'll see why shortly. So back up here on lines two, three and four, I'm going to comment out those three lines.
Basically, I'm going to add just the one line there - text equals double quotes and then a minus character in the
double quotes dot join parentheses
args.
I'm also going to go ahead and comment out this one here on line 13, as well as this one here on line 16.
Alright, so go ahead and run this again, or run it, and you can see we've now got a good result and we haven't
got the minus character showing anymore, which is good, but what about these two lines down here that I commented
out.
Let's put them back in,
and when we run our app again, we actually get an error.
And the problem here is that you can't join ints to strings.
So obviously, in that scenario there on line 13 we're using an int, and on line 16 we're also using ints
in addition to strings.
And again you can't join ints to strings.
So this is a scenario where a list comprehension can be useful.
So instead of passing the args list to the join function, we can instead parse a list comprehension
and convert all the arguments to strings.
So let's go back and do that.
So we're going to modify line five. At the moment we've got text equals double quotes minus sign in between
dot join.
So we're going to change this a little bit now, so we're going to leave the parentheses there
in join.
But then we are going to add left to right square brackets str parentheses arg closing parentheses,
for arg in args.
So basically, using a list comprehension there.
So that's pretty cool - we've avoided concatenating strings in a loop and allowed the join function to
be used with a list that would otherwise have caused errors.
And just to confirm that, if we run that again, you can see we no longer get errors and we're getting the correct output with
the integers showing as well.
Now there's a lot more we can do with comprehensions.
We've really only just started with them.
We're going to carry on with list comprehensions in the next video,
but before I stop this one, there's one thing I want to say about that code -
this is the code on line 5 again. You'll often see that line, code like that, written without the
square brackets. So in other words if I remove the square brackets
and run it,
we do get the same result, as you can see.
But what we've got here isn't a list comprehension.
This is what's called a generator expression.
Now I said that they were similar
and we'll come back to this in a later video.
But for now what I'll do is I'll undo those changes, so we've got our list comprehension code back, the
left and right square brackets, and I'm going to close all these files
other than centre.text.py. I'll leave the project pane opened.
We're going to use that again later, and I'll see you in the next video.